When life began,
so did cancer.
Prehistoric animals have cancer.
In humans, you can find signs of cancer
in ancient specimens.
Physician and scientist Sidart Mukerji
calls cancer the emperor of all malades
in his Pulitzer Prizewinning history of
the disease.
Around 400 BC, Hypocrates, the Greek
physician known as the father of
medicine, is said to have first given it
a name, Carinos.
Why was it chosen? Why that word?
So, the word comes from crab. Um, and
there was something about tumors as they
sent their fingers or fingerlings into
the body, they look like the legs of a
crab sort of dug underneath the sand.
But the earliest reference to cancer can
be found about a thousand years earlier
here on this ancient Egyptian papyrus.
As for treatment, it says there is none.
In fact, it's not until the arrival of
anesthesia in the mid 19th century that
surgery became a viable option. Who
would have thought you could open up a
human body, take out an ovary that may
have been involved with cancer and sew
that human being up again and they would
come back to life. This was an an
amazing advancement.
How many labs are there around the world
doing cancer research?
Oh, I would say hundreds. I mean this
building itself,
Luker G, who conducts research and
treats patients at New York's Columbia
University Medical Center, says by the
beginning of the 20th century, X-ray
technology would give rise to the very
earliest form of radiation treatment.
And the use of toxic chemicals to kill
cancer cells, what's commonly called
chemotherapy, was a 1940s development.
The dream was to invent a chemical that
would kill the cancer cell but spare the
normal cell. The problem is that cancers
evolve out of normal cells. They are
very close cousins.
This woman has cancer of the cervix to
treat it.
Still, given that potential therapies
were often as fearsome as the disease
itself, a cancer diagnosis came to be
cloaked in secrecy, even shame. When my
mother was surviving cancer, it was
literally unspeakable.
Yeah.
What changed that?
You couldn't shove it under the carpet
anymore. We saw our children dying from
it. We saw our parents dying from it. It
had to be a public word because
otherwise we couldn't have a
conversation. How can there be a war on
something you can't name?
Which brings us to 1971
when President Richard Nixon did in fact
declare war on cancer. I sent a message
to the Congress the first of this year
which provided for a national commitment
for the conquest of cancer.
The war on cancer grew out of a
particular optimism around cancer in the
late 1960s early 1970s. Remember human
beings had just walked on the moon. Why
don't we cure cancer in 10 years? It was
thought very doable.
It turns out that optimism was
premature.
Key was the realization that a patient's
genes could in effect be calling the
shots.
What tells a cell to stop growing or
start growing in the first place? The
idea that sitting at the center of the
puzzle was genes. That was a huge leap
because all of a sudden you had a
framework to understand cancer.
Once researchers began to understand
cancer's mechanism, more clues started
to fall into place. And the human genome
project completed in 2003 led to
development of still more treatments
among them individually targeted
imunotherapy techniques.
And where are we in the timeline or the
arc? The problem remains how do you
target how do you kill the cancer cell
while sparing normal cells? That was a
puzzle in 1920
was a puzzle in 1970. It's a puzzle in
2017.
You have more tools now.
Many many more tools.